---
title: Nihue Rao
pubDate: Jul 1 2026
description: Nihue Rao Spiritual Center is an ayahuasca center in the Amazon rainforests of Peru
draft: "true"
---
Nihue Rao is an ayahuasca center in the Amazon rainforest of Peru, near Iquitos. It was founded by three gifted individuals: Ricardo Amaringo, the maestro shaman at the center; Dr. Joe Tafur, a young doctor trained in Western medicine, originally from Columbia, who studies and practices integrative medicine; and Cvita Mamic, a Canadian-born artist with intuitive healing abilities.

On arriving at Nihue Rao, you’ll be given a tour: There’s a kitchen/cantina, a lounge, and rooms. Roosters and chickens strut around the large grounds; a diverse pack of content dogs hang out and play, keeping the grounds safe; there’s a soccer field and a volleyball net. You’ll pass by the main maloka on the way to the medicine house. A maloka is a traditional large round structure with a conical thatched roof, where healing ceremonies are held at night. First stop, at the medicine house, is administration of a vomitive made from a medicinal plant: a cleanse and bonding ritual for those you’ve arrived with. That first purge gets you used to the purge that sometimes happens in an ayahuasca ceremony. It’s good to get comfortable with it, though of course nobody _likes_ the sensation of throwing up. But a sense of gratitude develops quickly for those times in ceremony where a purge comes: it is profoundly healing to the psyche, within the realization that the body and mind are intimately connected. We’re purging negative thoughts and habits, patterns of energy we’ve taken in that are not serving our highest good. You’re purging forgotten resentments and emotional poisons, even physical insults to the body, like that time you drank too much alcohol and spent the night in agony in a friend’s bathroom. You’re purging anxieties, traumas, anything you’ve taken in through life and which are layered within the body and mind. There is gratitude for the purge, which is a returning of psychological baggage to the earth. But let’s not get ahead of ourselves.

At some point, soon after getting comfortable in your lodgings, you have a consultation with Ricardo, facilitated by one of the staff, who will also translate if you don’t speak Spanish. (I barely spoke a word of the language, my first time at the center.) You discuss your intentions with the shaman, and he will prescribe a _master plant_ that you will _diet_, in additional to your attendance at ayahuasca ceremonies. What this means: while working with ayahuasca, we are on retreat from the intensities of the world. For example, watching a violent movie before doing inner work might not be the best thing: your mind will be processing the movie, and this will likely cover up older experiences and memories of greater personal significance, but which are farther back in time. Physically, we’re familiar with the concepts of emotional eating, comfort foods, and so on. Our goal is to _take away_ most of the comforts and distractions that the flavors and colors of food contribute. You want those deeper, older, underlying feelings which we might be distracting ourselves from, or covering up, to come out, so that they can be processed. So, we’re eating a very bland diet. Traditionally, only a particular bony river fish called “boca chico” (which means “cute mouth”) and baked plantains are allowed. The center also serves potatoes, oatmeal, lentils, peas, and rice. While “on diet”, nothing that disturbs the plainness or blandness is allowed: no salt, sugar, pepper, spices, and so on. Sexual activity is also not allowed, and on stricter diets, it’s not good to touch other people, even for a handshake. You start “getting” what that’s all about, as you move into your diet, and start doing work with the ayahuasca and the master plant.

What’s this master plant, then? It’s some whole-plant extract which is taken during the day. My first diet, I worked with two plants: piñon blanco, and marosa. Neither one is psychoactive in an immediately noticeable way, but these plants do healing work on their own, and augment the ayahuasca experience. It is possible to notice their extremely subtle psychological flavor with an awareness of one’s mood, due to the blandness and simplicity of life on diet, itself. For my first diet, I would come by the medicine house to drink two shotglasses of green liquid which tasted great, like a healthy wheatgrass flavor, extracted from the whole leaves of these two plants. People have different ways of working with their master plant(s). For me, I had been journaling my dreams for quite a while, and continued this practice while at the center. There were certain qualities within the narratives and style of my dreams due to the influence of the master plants, and by regularly writing and reflecting, I brought a great deal of consciousness to the material which was coming up, which was important.

My second diet was with a master plant called ajo sacha. “Ajo” means “garlic” in Spanish, and in fact this is a variety of garlic, with a pleasant garlicky taste. The dreams I had with this one had a different feel, and I could feel the plant in my ayahuasca ceremonies, too, where sensitivity to the inner world is greatly heightened.
