---
title: And so I begin...
description: Getting started with this blog
pubDate: Jun 16 2025
---
I'm excited to begin blogging here— there is so much to say. This pltfrm for self expression is intended to be a pltfrm for cultivating and ushering in a new chapter for both myself, and for the reality we are cocreating. I cannot minimize the impact that A.I. has been having on my own self-understanding, yet that comes with a great deal of consideration. I believe that I myself have a unique role to play, which comes from a great deal of experience with trauma, psychedelic exploration and healing, embodiment, relational and sensory sensitivities, and an artistic/musical core: while I am an individual, I hope others may find resonance in hearing about my own journey, and in joining in co-creating where the resonance sparks new awarenesses within.

I've had this domain name (`pltfrm.com`) since perhaps 2004— I registered it with the vague thought that I could create a business, here. Back then I was working at my first job out of college, working with Microsoft Access-database design and data analysis at a boutique financial company. I appreciated how it was such an art-form to create user interfaces in the way that Access allowed: the ability to design a full-fledged user application from the ground up, with buttons, fields, dropdown controls— all tied to data in an SQL database. Once I'd learned about SQL queries and the elegance and intention behind it, Access seemed like a tool far ahead of its time: a codeless tool, essentially, for creating interfaces that really appealed to the artistic side of me which would tweak control positions, table setups, etc. I learned to drop into Visual Basic for certain hookups, to use pass-through queries to generate SQL code on the fly to connect my Access database as a front-end to a high performance / reliability backend like MySQL... Microsoft had their own solution, SQL Server, which I never dabbled with. It's weird talking about this, but I'm wanting to bring forth and capture the place I was when I doubt `pltfrm.com`. My idea at the time, during these early Internet days, was to build "Access for the Web"— having used various toolkits for building Web pages, I was frustrated by the need to learn new coding frameworks, write CRUD code (Create, Retrieve, Update, Delete) that was repetitive, and so on. (Stuff like Ruby on Rails automates this, but you still need to learn a framework, and it doesn't have an automatic integration with what Access called "Controls") - RoR automates the generation of the boilerplate "backend code", and you still need a frontend framework. There have been Web-forward toolkits for all this, and there have been projects that try to adapt Access to the Web. I tried out something called Caspio, a long time ago. It was a more corporate-focused solution, and didn't have the simplicity and elegance I was craving. So I moved on from all that, and let it go... I'd always imagined I could build something at `pltfrm.com`.

And lo and behold, that journey picks up, in an unexpected and brilliant way. It's 2025, and tech tools have changed so much. If I were interested in databases, still, there's Notion and AirTable... probably many more competitors. I figure those are solved problems. I thought I'd moved on from the tech space. And yet, that something new on the horizon that's emerged front and center now is A.I. It's responsible for both helping me build the simple stack behind this site (Obsidian for writing and maintaining entries using markdown; Astro as a static-site-generator in a repository that uses GitHub actions to automatically build the content and put it out on the Web hosted for free using GitHub Pages), and the conversations that are expanding my mind and helping me in unpacking the richness of my life experiences such that I can even begin to share and synthesize what's happened in between my tech career, and the path that is emerging now. You might ask A.I. to summarize these words, but this is my authentic expression. And there are many topics I want to explore and share about.

Actually, the reason I'm writing this is because I'm excited about the tech stack I have, and just wanted to test it: write something, save, push, and boom, it's online. So I'm going to do that, and for now: to be continued!