---
title: Healing Tinnitus with Plant Medicine
description:
---
October 3, 2015, was the fateful night that I attended a blues performance by the Denis Jones Band at Harvelle’s nightclub in Santa Monica and sustained hearing trauma, which took me on a difficult and wonderful healing journey: through a great deal of suffering, and through a lot of learning.

I’d just attended the Visionary Convergence in L.A. the week before, a psychedelics and plant medicine conference, and was riding a wave of joy: many friends were at the conference, I'd attended many fascinating presentations, and I just had a great time. The conference was like being back in college, but where each lecture is interesting and there’s no need to take notes and no tests, rather hanging out and reconnecting with friends, discussing excitedly which talk we’re most interested in going to next, and what the qualities were of the one we’d just attended. The speakers are the accessible stars of the psychedelic or plant medicine world, revered because of accomplishment in expression, synthesis, bringing their own journeys into the far reaches of consciousness down to earth through integration with their own lives, relating from a place of enthusiastic interest in sharing, exploring something fundamentally interesting, fascinating, hopeful.

The next week, because I’d been feeling high from spending time with many new friends, several of whom I’d met while on retreat in Peru, doing medicine work (where connections become deep, where the protective postures and layers between people are removed and we start connecting authentically), I felt that I wanted to continue the wave of joy I was getting through spending time with friends by meeting up with some other friends who’d invited me to this blues performance. I figured, I’ll wear my trusty Etymotic -20db NR musician’s earplugs, which I’d used effectively in some pretty loud places, such as big parties at Burning Man. I knew I had sensitive hearing, so I used hearing protection religiously, and wore my earplugs for the whole time we were at the performance, which wasn’t even that long — we stayed for a while and left around midnight, as I recall, after a couple hours. I didn’t drink, and just tried to observe, appreciate the vibe, the musicianship and electric guitar-playing skills of Dennis Jones, hanging out with my friends. It was pretty loud in there, but never occurred to me that my earplugs wouldn’t be enough. (I wondered whether my ayahuasca path itself had sensitized my hearing and made me more vulnerable physically to hearing damage. However, the fact that I'd spent lots of time in loud places without problem, e.g. at Burning Man, points to actual physical trauma to a part of the body.)

On leaving the venue and returning home to my quiet room, I first perceived the tinnitus start up. The perception verified what I later understood the condition to be: it was as though input to one particular frequency was missing, so circuitry associated with that frequency turned up the gain. And kept turned it up, further and further, until the random molecular background “noise” in the cellular environment became the basis for nerves firing; the hiss one hears when turning up the volume on an amplifier with no musical instrument connect is analogous, except imagine that amp's hiss turned up extra loud, but only in one, extremely high-pitched frequency (in my case).

The condition worsened over a period of a few days. I could distinctly perceive a certain very high frequency which was like an amplification of underlying “silence”. Sometimes the frequency would be quieter, and then I felt my brain in the area of that frequency listening within its space, trying to hear something, turning up the gain. I was trying to tell it, no, don’t do that! There’s nothing interesting there, please turn it down! But it wasn’t working. The gain would turn up, and the frequency's loudness would then get stuck. I could only hope that it would relax and give up later. The high-gain condition would sometimes vary, but I had to accept that maybe it would be a few nights before it would relax, so I would have to just go to sleep with it this way. Maybe I could do something that would shake up the wiring and cause the frequency to release: So for the first few days/nights I was hopeful; perhaps also the circuitry would figure out the “problem” and resolve on its own.

A few weeks after I’d been hit with the condition, I went to a Shpongle concert in L.A. and took a bit of LSD to enhance the experience. I wore my new -30db musician’s plugs (I didn’t trust my -20db any more), and felt that I needed to be extra sensitive/protective of my hearing. This was also intended to be a trial, because I was also deciding that, ok, I can’t just stop going to cool musical events that have a bit of volume for the rest of my life; I want to find a way to do so this safely, not further traumatizing my hearing. The tinnitus wasn’t that bad during the daytime; it was just at night that it would really bother me. After the concert, which was in fact loud, but not too loud, energy had shifted in my body, and my hearing as well. There was a little bit of time when I was back home, in the quiet of my room, lying in bed, that the sound stuttered, faded out, and then for a minute I was free! And then the gain mechanism rebooted itself, focused back in within that frequency, and the sound came back. There had been a moment of hope (that the LSD would "shake up the snow globe" and help nerves that were stuck in a wired-together state to separate and reconfigure), and a subjective glimpse into the brain mechanism around the tinnitus, but nothing more that I was able to do. (Perhaps, in the future, higher-dose psychedelic therapy, combined with the application of particular frequencies, might be a potential therapy for Tinnitus: Paul Stamets said something intriguing at a MAPS conference, once, involving the combination of psilocybin and lion's mane mushrooms, as being synergistic for healing hearing.)

Tinnitus is a funny thing. You can tell people about it, but because they can’t hear it, it doesn’t exist in their reality. It is an entirely inner, hallucinatory experience within the sensory apparatus of one person. It’s not a particularly *interesting* hallucinatory experience per se. Although perhaps the term is not correct; a hallucination could refer to something that one cannot through the senses distinguish as being real versus unreal. In this case, I always knew that the extremely high-pitched sound I could hear did not represent anything in the outer world.

> While voices carry meaning — whether this is trivial or portentious — some auditory hallucinations consist of little more than odd noises. Probably the most common of these are classified as tinnitus, an almost nonstop hissing or ringing sound that often goes with hearing loss, and may be intolerably loud at times.” [Oliver Sacks, Hallucinations, p.64-65.]

I started researching potential treatments, in particular searching/browsing [ClinicalTrials.gov](clinicaltrials.gov). I found one trial which looked promising: A substance would be injected into the ear, and this would somehow reset the auditory mechanism and cure the tinnitus on a physical level. I filled in my information and applied for that one; it was worth a shot. The window for treatment for this trial specified that the patient be within 3 months of receiving the hearing trauma. A woman called me back about two and a half months after I’d filled out the application, and asked me what date my trauma had occurred. I wasn’t exactly sure, so I thought fast. There was a temptation to lie and say that it had been recent, but being unsure of the exact date, I synthesized the answer by subtracting a little less than three months from the present date of the callback. I think it was around the end of the year, at this point. The way the math worked out, unfortunately, I was just outside the window to qualify for the trial: I’d be out of range of the dates I could go to a conveniently located clinic in Santa Monica. The study was being done with worldwide participants by a German pharmaceutical company, I was located conveniently near offices where the trial was being done (Santa Monica in this case), and yet participation was just barely out of reach.

This was a difficult time for me, feeding from the strength and repetitiousness of negative thinking related to the condition. I had a simultaneous feeling of desperation, while my rational side championed the need to accept and do my best. I also thought about the study, reflecting: should I have lied about the date of the trauma so that I could have qualified? I definitely had the opportunity to. When I initially spoke with the woman who'd called me back about the AM-101 clinical trial, I said, "I think the trauma was on such and such date, but I need to check my records (go back in my email history and find the invitation from my friend to attend the blues performance), and then I’ll call back and give you confirmation of the exact date." This is when I thought, ok, I can give her a slightly different date that is more recent. Guiltily, I imagined there would be a suspicion or awareness from the other side, because surely people with medical conditions where there is a potential treatment promised are incentivized to adjust details of their reality so that they can qualify for receiving a medicine which has a high potential of being able to help. (I’d read reports in forums from some individuals who had undergone the experimental therapy, and whose tinnitus had been healed.) So, I was frustratingly close. Also, the manufacturer had published on a website advertising the study: “If you’ve suffered acute hearing injury resulting in tinnitus, it’s important to treat it fast, because otherwise the condition can move more deeply into the brain where it becomes permanent and not possible to treat.” So I was facing this imagined ticking clock: If I don’t fix it now, then I may not be able to. I also saw, though, that there was a between-three-and-six-month window for which a projected trial was to be done with this same medication. So that gave me hope that maybe it could be fixable even as more time passed.

My tinnitus faded a bit. In the beginning, it was particularly distressing. I had one very hard night where I was woken up by the sound and pushed away nearly suicidal thinking: If I have to go through life with this constant companion, I thought, this constant shrill scream in my head, then I would choose not to. These were emotion-driven thoughts, from the intensely conscious frustration of focusing on this sound connected with the feeling of injury or trauma to bodily integrity, associated also with intense regret/anger. My mind would move habitually to thoughts about how bad this was; I had to learn how to be in more control of my thoughts. Regular meditation helped, because I could learn to focus on my breath and see when thoughts about the tinnitus would come through; I could let them go, and slowly, over weeks, I improved. This thought would still come, frequently: “you can let go of negative thinking, but this sensory input is still coming in to your consciousness, and what do you do about that?” I remember going for a run and really struggling to keep my mind from its preoccupation with the trauma, with checking on it and thinking about it. I had to keep moving my focus of attention back to my breath, and this helped in getting better, bit by bit, at going for increasingly longer periods without preoccupation with the sound.

I also found it beneficial to sometimes listen intentionally and focus in on the sound, because I knew that it was part of my body/mind sensory apparatus, which itself needed conscious attention. To push it away would’t work; I needed to listen to what it was trying to tell me, as it were, and do this with the energy of self-acceptance and even gratitude. I tried to incorporate that "attitude of gratitude", trying to adopt the attitude that from a spiritual perspective, somehow, even though I didn’t understand it yet, even _this_ was an important part of my life journey: a teacher, of a sort. So little by little, I was changing something. There seemed to be something paradoxical about focusing on having gratitude for something which I didn’t want simply because I couldn’t get rid of it, but this seemed like a higher path than holding inner resentment or pushing against this immovable wall. I focused on changing the story I told myself. It may sound sappy, but I held the thought, “it’s the voices of the highest angels communicating with you.” The feeling could then drive a different story, an _amor fati_, love of fate as if I had chosen it. If you're old enough you'll remember the hiss of a modem connecting your computer to the early Internet or another network over a phone line; maybe this was like a modem link into my brain... at least I could play with the story.

Sometimes the sound would wake me up at night, although thankfully this wasn’t too frequent. I noticed that it would be louder in the morning before I got out of bed; once I got up and was no longer horizontal, it wasn’t as intense. I had one dream which presented my frustration in a very visual form: The sliding window of my bedroom, from an earlier part of my life, is open, and someone is operating a chainsaw in the yard next door, below my window. I close the window so it will be quieter inside, but it has no effect; the sound is just as loud as it was before. I woke up thankful that my tinnitus wasn’t quite as loud as that chainsaw in my dream, but the concept of inability to change or prevent meaningless and annoying sensory input from something in the perceptual system was just as real.

I moved up to Berkeley for a few months and there were moments of despair during my drive. Not just connected with the tinnitus; there was a part of me which felt a lot of overwhelm. I pulled over near my arrival and cried a little bit, shallowly, which was the best I could manage, and felt a little better. My experience in Berkeley came together well. I found a nice house to live in, and focused on artwork and other projects. During this time I found that listening to music felt great to my brain. Aerobic exercise at the gym, or running in the hills, helped with the feelings related to the tinnitus as well. While listening to complex, detailed electronic music (e.g. Shpongle), I might stop noticing the tinnitus altogether. Perhaps I could find it if I hunted for it, but I was able to focus on the music and let go of the sound, while I had my headphones on. Because it was extremely quiet and peaceful in the room I’d rented up in the Berkeley Hills, I was very aware of the sound while sleeping and waking up, but I had gotten used to it by this point; I’d realized that pretty much any thought about it wasn’t of any benefit, and so the best thing to do was to do my best to not think about it; in fact I was thinking about it less and less. I’d be on the phone sometimes for an hour-long meeting and notice, on hanging up after the call, that I hadn’t had a single thought about the tinnitus. I felt proud of myself; this was the nature of that bittersweet accommodation or habituation: It’s there, but just don’t think about it. I appreciated the condition as a teacher, in this respect: I learned how to have greater control of my thoughts.

Every once in a while I’d check ClinicalTrials.gov, but there wasn’t anything promising there. I read as much as I could about how to treat tinnitus. I found a promising therapy called “audio notching” whereby one finds the exact frequency of the phantom sound, and can construct a sound file consisting of white noise (audio snow in which every frequency is equally represented), which has been created so that a very narrow band is missing, centered around the tinnitus frequency. By listening to the custom sound file with earphones, every day, neuroplasticity will start to take effect. The brain will start to devote more processing capacity to all of the other frequencies, and areas of the brain devoted to the missing frequencies will shrink, yielding a lower perceived volume of the tinnitus frequency all the time. I used a tone generator on one website to try and identify my precise tinnitus frequency, but had a lot of trouble, because the frequency is so high. I could have continued on this path, but actually wanted to pursue a complete cure, not just a decrease in signal volume. Rather than the idea of minimizing the input of this traumatized and problematic inner circuitry, I wanted to maintain awareness of it, so that I could be conscious of actual healing and regeneration within that part of my sensory apparatus.

It was earlier in the year, after I had received this trauma, that I had decided to go back to Nihue Rao, an ayahuasca center in Peru. Having already spent a cumulative four months dieting and working with natural plant medicines and expanded states of consciousness, across two visits, I’d had the intuition that I wanted to go back for a third time. My first two-month retreat had been an amazing, eye opening, and deeply healing experience. Upon returning home, there was the sense that my work was incomplete; I had sensitivities and discomforts in life and wasn’t quite sure yet what to do. I didn’t want to just go back and get a “regular” job, and yet I did some interviews, anyway. After my second two-month retreat, I’d spent half a year going to many music festivals, not exactly sure what I was looking for, yet starting to find things that felt aligned.

Having been on two plant medicine dieta (ayahuasca) retreats in the jungle, each about two months long (32 and 30 ceremonies each, respectively), I was comfortable going deep: I booked a _three_ month retreat at the ayahuasca center, my second home in the rainforest. My main intention was to heal my hearing trauma, of course. I had imagined, back home, that the Shipibo medicine cabinet might contain specific plants which were _known_ for their ability to cure trouble to the hearing systems. But under what conditions would tinnitus arise naturally, though? In cultures living very close to nature, how would this happen? A tiger has roared too close to one’s head, I pondered? But I trusted this modality and its ability to heal what is inaccessible to Western medicine, by collapsing the mind/body duality and through the spiritual portal, unlocking physical healing (in fact, showing us how spiritual/physical is itself a limiting duality).

I had also been thinking, from a spiritual standpoint, that the hearing trauma might be “the plants calling me back”. Perhaps magical thinking or narrative overlay, but perhaps not: because perhaps I wouldn’t have come back to the jungle to do a three-month diet, otherwise, which itself was the adventure of a lifetime and deepened my relationship with this medicine and the Shipibo healing modality. So, I’d been humorously entertaining this thought, even telling it to my new friends in the arising ayahuasca-drinking culture. (Reflecting on my path deeply has showed me how an unconscious drive towards healing and wholeness can steer a life trajectory; choices reveal their deeper purposes much later. What on the surface seemed to be about one thing, may much more deeply be about another thing.)

In my consultation with Ricardo after arriving, I communicated my intentions. He prescribed a master plant called _ayahuma_, a large rainforest tree. The effects will be a lot stronger, I’d been told, by a friend who had dieted with this tree before. I’d kind of been hoping for something very _specific_, for the maestro shaman to say, “ah, hearing damage, take this specific (and uncommon) medicinal plant...” just as in the West we have specific distinct medicines approved for very specific health issues. But in the world of plant shamanism, that is not necessarily the case, and I quickly began to appreciate why.

_Everything is connected_. Even though in my mind the hearing trauma was an isolated and unfortunate incident, in reality, everything is important. For example, why did I not leave the venue earlier, and continue to hang out even past the point that I felt much interest in the music? Why was I in a social situation in a society where people listen to such extraordinarily loud sound, perhaps numbing ourselves with alcohol and volume? What about the energy carried in the music itself, the emotions of the performers, the _meaning_ of the music? What about my own relationship to this body, the way I felt about and interacted within myself, not tuned in to my own inner signals? The ayahuma started dredging things up. While it would have been nice to say “oops, sorry” and undo that night, in fact it was a nexus point in life where the signal itself of other forces might have found a way to punch through, in a way which definitely got my attention: A call that couldn’t be silenced. Over the course of my three month diet, the healing (on many inner levels) and learning was profound. With respect to the hearing trauma, it unfolded as follows.

For longer-term dieters at Nihue Rao, the guest may stay in a tambo, which is a screen-walled hut embedded in nature. The particular tambo to which I was assigned was farther into the forest than any of the others; this meant that I slept and spent much time deeply ensconced in the rainforest noises: the continual buzzing, chirping, tweeting of bugs, birds, bees. In fact the rainforest sounds were _so_ loud that I immediately noticed: hey, I actually _can’t tell_ whether what I’m hearing is from my tinnitus, or from the surrounding environment: a perfect sonic masking. Many times I resisted the urge to plug my fingers into my ears in order to check whether the tinnitus was present, and appreciated the idea that this "organic" natural sound, the multidimensional richness of life around me, while loud, held soothing and comfort.

During my three-month diet, I had many dreams, often with particular vividness. I would wake up and write notes, which I'd expand in the morning. I got better at recording, writing out, and reflecting on my dreams: One of the primary ways I'd commune with the spirit of ayahuma and other plants I'd dieted was through prolific dreams. (With respect to ayahuma, sometimes I would catch a particular rendering quality in the dream: a cartoonish, graphic novel finish to the perceptual world.)

One of the key dreams I had helped guide the course of healing my hearing, and is an interesting case study for how plant spirits can interact with us. I had just drunk a big bowl of liquid made from the inner bark of the ayahuma tree, ingesting the plant as a way to connect with its medicine through my body. The following is essentially verbatim from my journal at the time. :

> ...[I] was able to fall effortlessly asleep, dreaming right away. My dreams were lucid but not that controllable. I examined the awesome rendering system and physics engine by tossing a piece of styrofoam which floated on the air. Before this I moved around in the world and examined it a little. I was on my block and moving away from my home. This was uncomfortable and I turned back. There were emotionally cold currents but I held on. I looked at my hands and saw them stretching horizontally.”
> 
> There were intense feelings, presumably from ayahuma. It's like I'm inside the wood, and it is doing work on me. It is not comfortable, but it is not painful. It's like electric current going through my whole body or coursing through parts of it. There was frequency shuffling through my hearing system, first in the lower registers, and then with some overtones that reached higher. Like riffling through the hair cells [in the cochlea] with a comb. [...] I feel the examination and direct healing.
> 
> I asked, show me my tinnitus. I was shown a spectrum analyzer type display yet it also felt very intense. I felt reassured that my system could handle it. I felt the overload and could see a sort of hole in the analyzer's frequency map. I pulled out of this view. Perhaps this is showing me the conditions under which the damage occurred.
> 
> Next I asked to be shown how to heal it. I was shown little girls in a classroom, slightly cartoonish looking. They were wearing uniforms and I could see their socks over skinny legs. The view panned up and I saw the face of a girl who seemed hateful or mean. She had orange hair and there was a blast of cold air against the left side of my chest. I held on and tried my hardest to love her, with her meanness blasting at me like a cold jet engine. I kept saying, I love you. Her face morphed into that of a young woman, round and with short hair, like Patty from [the] Peanuts [comic strip], a little. She looked happier, but there was still distortion. I saw cartoonish pine trees and with perhaps a house. The view faded and was dark.

As I woke up from the dream and reflected, I “trusted” the answer which seemed, beyond a doubt, to have been received or given to me directly in this form from the ayahuma spirit, in response to my request ("how do I heal this?"). The girls in the classroom must represent frequencies in my hearing system. I understood that the mean and spiteful girl must represent _the particular frequency_ which had sustained trauma. The intensity of her emotions must be an emanation of all of the stored negativity I had felt because of my tinnitus, towards this part of me. I understood that the answer to my question, “how can I heal this?” was: heal my relationship with that red-haired girl, as a visual symbol for a tiny part of my body.

In an ayahuasca ceremony, the boundary between reality and what is in the imagination can blur: imagination can become much more "active" and expanded, and we can perceive the feelings and impacts of thoughts on the body, and vice versa: the impacts of experiences and how the feelings of those experiences have impacted the body. The imagination and the mind can be used in a more deliberate way, because feelings in the body are amplified in concert: ayahuasca truly shows us the inseperability of mind and body as one unit, like two sides of the same coin. I addressed my attention to the girl, in my imagination: I started by apologizing, saying: “I’m so sorry, I should take taken better care of this body, which I’m responsible for. You have every right to be angry at me, for as long as you want. I accept your anger.” I went on in this vein for a while, with the intention of relational repair. Towards the end of the ceremony, I had the sense that she was feeling better, and we were able to sit side-by-side on a hill overlooking a landscape. For the remaining two months, I would periodically check in on her.

---

After my diet, upon returning home, I found that the tinnitus was somewhat diminished; more importantly, I was _incapable of entertaining negative thoughts about it_. It remains a feature of my sonic landscape, but is not emotionally interesting to my mind.

What was going on, here? Although the whole interaction was in my imagination (first, through a dream; then, through intentional work within my mind), I sensed that I was not simply imagining the feelings of the girl. Perhaps I could have forced my imagination to picture her as having a particular emotion, but in reality I felt as though I had just set the stage, called up the image and and allowed the imaginal construct to be animated through a connection to another part of myself. Thus, the girl was symbolically a “handle” which allowed healing between parts of my self. "I" as my conscious free-willed narrative center, or egoic self, could take responsibility and integrate the lessons of the difficult feelings from the trauma, and thereby drain the situation of its emotional charge. Thus, the energy charge of a conflict within the self was released, and I found acceptance in this way. Ayahuasca is itself healing and releasing accumulated stress within the system; the fascinating narrative way this unfolds within the visionary experience reveals why we call these medicines " plant teachers" or "master plant teachers" or "master plants", with "master" used in the sense of "maestro", as in a teacher or expert.

The dream sequence reproduced above was about as close as I came to a direct conversation with the ayahuma spirit. First, I was able, in my dream, to examine _the rendering system itself_ with which my brain was constructing the experiential dream reality. We all carry around this hardware in our heads. Familiarity with the world of 3-D gaming and the idea of a “rendering engine” was the concept my mind used to understand what was happening. A rendering engine or “3-D engine” is the software used to translate data about the environment into a representation on a computer or movie screen. Rather than having to rewrite the complex code to rotate objects in space, apply surface textures, calculate lighting effects, simulate the effects of physics, and so forth, programmers and game designers use complex integrated libraries and tools which. Certainly our brains themselves have a rendering engine, used in dream production and imagination; in fact around constructing our representation of the world itself that appears to be "out there".